# Lecture 10 - US China/Quad Policy
## Pre-lecture notes
1. Does a competing military buildup against China by Vietnam and others create
a similar risk of regional destabilization that a US/China military tension 
could, even at a smaller scale?

2. Does the weaponization of the SCS countries give Beijing even further cause to
ramp up military contruction, even when their military competition is still 
relatively small? Does that pose unnecessary risk to the entire region?

3. How much should we trust the Quad when it was disbanded at its last attempt
due do domestic politics? NATO is an international mainstay, but can we rely
on a group that comes and goes with domestic whims?

4. Can we trust further delay of explicit military action by Beijing in the SCS,
given that they are still the dominant force but delaying could allow for further 
buildup of adversarial navies/allies?

India is hesitant to speak out on Taiwan due to potential military risk vis a 
vis China. How much can the Quad be relied upon in other matters against China, 
including combatting non-military pressures from Beijing, if that risk will
always be present?

Some Chinese ASCM's can reach the coast of Vietnam before a ship could even 
launch.

## Student presentation
### The Quad
**The Quad** is a semi-formal alliance between Japan, India, Australia, and the US

The Quad began informally in 2004 after the four countries banded together to
respond to a massive earthquake in the Indian Ocean caused a Tsunami.

Shinzo Abe resigning and an anti-Quad premier in Australia led to the downfall of
the first iteration of the Quad.

The moden iteration of the Quad is still unclear in its direction, but it has so 
far focussed heavily on COVID vaccine distribution and other public health goals.

The Quad has recently begun doing infrequent joint naval exercises. But they are
heavily emphasizing that they are *not* a military alliance.

Even with recent weaking of Article 9 of Japan's constitution that prohibits 
standing navies, they wouldn't even be able to participate in joint naval 
exercises.

#### Quad "Successes":
- vaccine partnership
- shipping task force
- Indo-Pacific Pertnership for Maritime Domain Awareness
- Increased cooperation &rarr; Quad fellowship 

### The South China Sea
Rougly 1/3 of the global shipping volume (by value) sailed through the SCS last
year.

In 1951, the San Francisco Peace Conference failed to formally establish who
owned several island chains that are still contested today.

An **Exclusive Economic Zone** is a region of water 200 miles from every nation's
coastline where they are solely in charge.

China built a permanent military base on an island that is in the Phillipines'
EEZ.

In 2016, China began drilling for oil in international waters in the SCS.
