# Lecture 11 - Climate Change and US Politics
## Pre-class notes
**Question:** We see disinformation and astroturfing coming from the oil and
gas industry at a scale unseen since the tobacco industry after the discovery of
the relationship between smoking and lung cancer. But, given that many billion
dollar industries (textiles, agriculture, etc.) are incurring huge risk and
financial loss caused by the current and future effects of climate change, why
don't we see "The Koch Brothers are full of shit" campaigns of smilar scale 
being funded by these industries? Don't they have the same financial incentive
to *prevent* climate change that the fossil fuel industry has to *perpetuate* it?

**Question:** Given that economies in South and Southeast Asia are among the 
most-impacted regions in the world by climate change, this seems to be a way
for China to double-dip positive gains as they continue to pollute en masse.
First, they are increasing their utilization of dirty energy, maintaining cheap
energy at the cost of negative climate impact, but those negative climate
impacts also directly harm their Asian neighbors, diminishing their capacity to
compete against China in the region. Given these dual positives, how can the US
or the West put pressure on China that is sufficient enough to begin to alter
their attitude on climate change?

## Student presentation notes
Democrats prefer to focus on both the practical goal of transitioning away from
fossil fuels and taking the moral highground. 

Republicans are concerned with the US losing its competitive advantage in the 
world market.

Action in Congress *does not* align with public opinion. The majority of both
parties' voters believe in the need for climate action, but Republicans continue
to push back against such action.

A large portion of the Inflation Reduction Act was bi-partisan.

Companies can increase retention of employees by between 25 and 50% by switching
to sustainable practices.

## Guest Speaker notes
80% of the cost of the green energy transition will be paid by businesses (both
big and small), not the government.

