# Week 2 - America's Role in the World
## Grand Strategy
**WOG** strategies are "Whole Of Government" strategies, which is a method of combining military, economic, and diplomatic means to advance foreign policy.

**Grand Strategy** is the capacity of a nation's leaders (military and non-military) for the nation's long-term wartime and peacetime interests.

Goal of Grand Strategy is to serve the vital national interest, but that's not always mututally exclusive from foreign interests.

### The National Interest:
The "Four P's" of national interest:
- Power
- Peace
- Prosperity
- Principles

The *Marshall Plan* post-WWII to rebuild Europe was good for all four, for example.

## Strategy formation
#### Threat Assessment
Prioritizing policy based on the threat to vital interests is crucial.

#### Strategy Viability
Once a problem is triaged, a likely-effective strategy must be formed.

#### Domestic support
Once you have a strategy, it is unlikely to succeed without sufficient domestic support.

## Notes:
The [Bretton Woods system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bretton_Woods_system) helped establish American economic primacy around the world.

### Besevic (spelling)
West Point educated, but *very* anti-intervention.

Wants to break away from American Exceptionalism

Self-sufficiency is his main prescription.

He is a member of the **restraint school** of foreign policy.

Founding member of the [Quincy Institute for Responsible Statecraft](https://quincyinst.org/).

### Rapp-Hooper/Lisner
Five big international shifts in forces: 
- Decline in American primacy
- Return to great power competition (multipolar vice bi-polar)
- Rise of new gray-zone non-military competition
- Rise of middle powers that differ along economic and ideological lines
- American govern disfunction/paralysis

The US can no longer set democratic/economic norms alone, but needs to build a coalition to set and enforce these norms.

The US needs to regain the nations top talent for national security purposes, much like China does.

Foreign policy doesn't necessarily have to be centered around political/ideological structures.

If you only interface with ideologically similar states, you let the illiberal world fester and become a more serious problem.

## Notes
**Security dillema** is the phenomena where increasing defense capabilities can increase tensions, increasing competing military tensions on both sides.

