# Lecture 3 - China Threat: Serious or Overblown?
## Authors
#### [Susan Shirk](https://china.ucsd.edu/scholars/shirk.html) 
Graudate degree in political science from MIT

Chair of the 21st Century China center at UC San Diego.

Former Asst. Secretary of State in the Bureau of East Asia and Pacific Affairs.

#### John Mueller
Professor Emeritus at Ohio State

Researches international politics, foreign policy, defence policy, public opinion, terrorism/cunterterrorism, democratization, and economic history.

#### Alastair Johnston
Professor of China in World Affairs at Harvard.

Researches socialization theory, strategic culture, and other areas with a focus on East Asian affairs.

More recently, researching the impact of social media on inter-state security dilemmas.

## Questions for Guest Speaker
1. Do you think that things like the unrest within caused by China's COVID policy or the from without surrounding the treatment of the Uyghur Muslims dissuades any military ambitions that China *may* have? If so, even if we concede that China's military is approaching a concerning size, would you classify them as a military superpower?

**UNABLE TO ASK** 

2. Given the massive language barrier between Americans and the Chinese, if an average American citizen wanted to help rebuild the cultural bridge to China, would you recommend working mostly internally to the US with organizations like *Stop Asian Hate*, or are there ways that an average American (perhaps one that doesn't go to a university with a sizeable Chinese student population) can reach out directly in China?

**UNABLE TO ASK** 

3. How did Russia and China go from the Sino-Soviet border conflict in 1969 to "warmer" relations with Russia while tensions increased with the West? Was it a simple matter of the mutual consolidation of power by Putin and then President Xi that led to a "strongman alliance," or did Russia do something explicitly correct on China that the West failed to do?

**ANSWER** 

Warming to Putin has likely been a personal warming by Xi with considerable concerns from within for such warming between the two nations. Biden shared intelligence with China about Putin's invasion of Ukraine, which is a good diplomatic sign. Xi didn't believe us, but we proved correct, which could bolster our relationship in future matters.

There have been recent (last couple days) stories of some limited assistance to Russia from Chinese state-owned entities. Those stories do *not* indicate broad support for the Russian actions in Ukraine by the Chinese citizens or leadership.

**Lesson from Answer**: It's amazing how much can change in the global scale simply by getting Xi personally on board. US should focus hard on seeing what we can do to warm him to us. This may mean rethinking our military strategy.

## Guest Speaker Notes
### How did China "lose the West?"

Collective leadership went off the rails when it began to implement a more heavy-handed state role in the economy.

**Overreach** is an action that is self-defeating in its extremety.

Things in China were moving in a generally positive direction until around 2006-2008. The global financial crisis enforced this shift.

China's main problem was massive corruption. When Xi took charge, his mandate was to centralize power, but never to the Mao-esque extreme that he did.

Xi's "anti-corruption campaign" has become a purge of all of his party/personal opponents.

Xi is surrounded by yes-men, and thereby could be unaware of the social/economic/foreign forces that are working against him.

America's overreaction to China's overreach can damage our own openness and reputation abroad. China could take the US down with it or drag us into warfare.

### Could this all change how Xi rules?
The collapse of zero-COVID was a huge deal, but the long-term consequences of that are hard to guess.

There is definitely a lot of criticism of Xi in the elite world in China from intellectuals, businesspeople, political leaders, and other Chinese elites. Privately, if much less publically.

American diplomacy all but stopped for all four years of Trump and the first two years of Biden. 

Anti-American sentiment has only recently budded in China, both because of Chinese propaganda and aggressive American policy.

## Lecture Notes
Clearly, domestic policy impacts foreign policy, be it in a democracy or an autocracy.

US analysts were predicting a Chinese adoption of capitalism. But China ended up *adapting*, not *adopting*, capitalism.

