# Lecture 5 - Why did Russia Invade Ukraine?
## Guest Speaker - James "Jim" Goldgeier
Leading expert on Russia and NATO.

Visiting fellow at Brookings

## Guest Speaker Questions
There is a long history of the US taking various actions (backing the rise of
democracy in Ukraine, military intervention in Kosovo, etc.) that Russia took as
intentionally violating Russian security interests.

The big question that has always remained is whether or not Russia will *ever* 
become post-imperialist.

Russia has moved all of their troops from the northwest border into Ukraine. 
Why? Because they don't *really* have any expectation of an attack from NATO.

---

**Question:** Was Gorbachev undertaking a fool's errand? Was he destined to fail?

**Answer:** Gorbachev was definitely great for the world and likely prevented
serious Soviet-US conflict. He was probably not *destined* to fail. But his 
personality and lack of willingness to use military force to maintain stability
probably set himself up for failure. There's also merit to Gorbachev's restraint
and respect for human life.

---

**Question:** How much of a role did American Westernization in Eastern 
Europe's democratic uprisings?

**Answer:** 2008 Bucharest declaration of Georgia and Ukraine NATO membership
was a mistake. The two big issues for Putin were democracy (which he fears) and a
desire that the West recognize Russia as having a privledged sphere of influence
in the former Soviet bloc. *Democracy is a threat to Putin, not Russia.* Any
Russia president would probably desire the West to "butt out" in matters
surrounding their sphere of influence, not just Putin.

