# Lecture 6 - Climate Change: Overblown or Underestimated?

## Student Lecture
**Compound Climate Fragility Risk** is the fact that we cannot *prove* that 
climate change causes an issue, but we do know that it *exacerbates* existing
issues.

**Example:** Climate change causes increased ocean acidity, which kills off or
forces out local fish population. Fish-eating mammals will migrate (often
towards the poles), which introduces invasive species. This serves to decrease
agricultural output in areas not directly impacted by ocean acidification itself.

China has plans to build the largest power-outputting dam in the world on a
river thatn supplies water to much of India and South Asia. The security and
ecological concerns for the region are massive.

The **doom loop** is when consequences of Climate Change causes severe issues that
need to be dealt with immediately, which puts off long-term work to combat it,
thus increasing the need for immediate action long term, compounding the issue.

Genetically-modified foods are more draught and disease resistant and are a
crucial component of combatting damage to food supplies.

**Biden's Contributions**
- Biden called CC and *existential threat* 
- Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) could stem other countries to act.
- Re-joined the Paris Climate Aggreement after Trump left it

The Clinton administration was the first to strongly put focus on Climate Change
in a National Security Strategy. In contrast, the Trump administration explicitly
banned the use of the term "Climate Change" by the EPA for the duration of his
administration.

**Policy Idea**: Add units of carbon used to produce food on a nutrition label.

---

## Guest Lecturer - Josh Busby
Professor at UT Austin, scholar of international policy surrounding climate and
security.

Book is [States and Nature](https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/states-and-nature/898ABA2AA3E3874AF3B57A1D887421C0) 

**Paired Cases** are when two countries face similar climate issues, but with 
different outcomes.

Climate change is an **actorless threat**, when a threat is posed to a state, but
not from another state or non-state actor.

Climate impacts will not necessarily lead to negative security outcomes.

**Question:** How can non-government/civil society groups impact climate policy

**Answer:** Robust civil society groups are not a *substitute* for a secure state,
but they can play a major role in service delivery, where local humanitarian/
civil groups shine and federal responses are often unprepared.

---

**Question:** Since markets are so crucial in combatting climate change, how can
we ensure that the productive steps made in that market be equitably distributed,
when markets are not exactly known for fair dissemination of wealth?

**Answer:** A major question here is the role of China/US competition in the
climate innovation space. The Biden IRA has some allocations for climate
technology, but we can probably expect that large-scale transfers of wealth to the
developing world will be next to zero.

---

**Question:** How can the DoD contribute to the solution of climate change, rather
that just preparing to combat the results of the issue (climate refugees, 
impacts on bases, etc.)?

**Answer:** The DoD isn't well-positioned to deal with things like draught-
resistant agriculture or solar energy. While it is attempting to reduce emmissions
etc., most of what it can do is proactively prepare for disaster responses, etc.

---

