# Lecture 9 - US Ukraine Strategy
#### My Proposal (before class)
**Goal**: Political peace settlement between Russia and Ukraine, with concessions
in favor of both sides to increase likelihood of success and preventing prolonged
conflict.

**Pro-Ukraine:**
- Restoral of territory (sans-Crimea)
- Soft security guarantees from the West (aid in resupplying arms and rebuilding
infrastructure without firm commitment to come to Ukraine's defense militarily)

**Pro-Russia:**
- Ukraine withdraws NATO application and agrees not to pursue membership.
- The West lifts many or nearly all sanctions against Russia
- Officially gains Crimea and the 2014 piece of the Donbass that was annexed in
2014

Here, both sides have political wins and losses, but the chance of escalation is
reduced by way of providing a formal resolution to conflict. Biden and the
Democrats run the risk of significant political losses at home, which could
jeopardize the future of aid to Ukraine, but a formal guarantee of support would
at least make it harder for a republican president to reneg, if one were to be
elected because of the public response to this plan. Russia would be able to 
declare victory anew because of the formal recognition of their control of the
2014 Donbass annexation and Crimea, and they stand to gain massively from the
alleviation of sanctions.

Assisting Ukraine in rebuilding their infrastructure and defense capabilities will
further brighten the Ukrainian view of the West. Even with no formal political 
agreement, this could increase political pressure on Ukrainian leaders in the
future to do what they can to further align with the West. This could be
potentially risky in the future if Russia sees Ukraine as too far gone from their
influence, but with a formal agreement of political neutrality, some of those
concerns may be able to be alleviated.

## Student presentation notes (Hannah)
Sanctions has reversed 15 years of economic progress in Russia. Unfortunately,
Russia is predicted to be back to pre-invation economic levels by 2025, and their
economy shrunk by 3%, even though the stated goal of sanctions was 7-10%.

There have been significant climate repercussions as Europe switches from Russian
natural gas to coal to try to keep energy prices low.

Prior to sanctions, Germany was the largest exporter of semiconductors to Russia.
Now, Russia has been forced to repurpose semiconductors from diswashers and other
consumer electronics.

Russian drones have been dropping repurposed missiles originally designed for 
submarines. The lack of precision caused by this change speaks to a shift from 
precision strikes to general destruction.

Russia is struggling to meet their deadlines to supply other countries with 
weapons.

Russia has been subsidizing luxury goods to keep the prices of smartphones and
designer bags down to keep his promise that the war would not impact Russians.

China recently released a 12-point paper about the conditions of the fighting, but
it was largely fluff.

## Lecture Notes
**Ways to avoid sanctions:**
1. Find alternate trade partners (like China/India for Russia).
2. Repression. Let people leave the country and suppress protests
3. Countersanctions (note increased gas prices).
4. Sanctions busting. This is basically sneaking around the supply chains to get
around sanctions.

**Sanctions** are economic controls attempting to enact policy change.

**Export controls** are the change in trade policy specifically meant to decrease
the military capabilities in the target. Semiconductors are the biggest example in
the Russia/Ukraine conflict.

## Guest speaker (GW Bush Nat'l Security Advisor)
Speaker is Stephen Hadley, book is [Hand-Off](https://www.amazon.com/Hand-Off-Foreign-Policy-George-Passed/dp/081573977X) 

**Question:** How do you see the world overall right now, in the era of greater
world power conflict that we are living through?

**Answer:** In the eraly 2000's, western style democracy seemed to be the clear
best means of organizing a state. That is no longer the case with China and Russia
promoting authoritarianism. We also see an increase in non-state actors' 
(businesses, terrorists, charities, etc.) influence on internatinal affairs.

---

**Question:** Previously, countries wanted to take a "side" between powers (US or
China, for example), but now more countries are taking no sides or both sides.
How is that relationship happening?

**Answer:** We can't operate with a "we will help if you do what we want" 
mentality. Post-WWII we were half of the global GDP, but we are currently under a
quarter. We have problems at home that we know how to solve, but Congress can't 
get them passed. We have to build an economy and a political system that grows
and improves society so we can regain our cultural and economic influence around
the world.
