# Lecture 11 - Ukraine Aid
## Guest Lecture Notes
There are multiple layers of checks on Ukraine aid:
1. The World Bank keeps receipts, and more money can't be sent until the previous is
accounted for.
2. Part of the funding goes towards financial auditors to track spending.
3. Quadrupled reports are sent to Congress about foreign aid.

NGO's and the EU work with state department to investigate corruption, especially
regarding Ukraine's EU application.

It is next to impossible that the US becomes the biggest donor for Ukrainian 
reconstruction like it has been during the war. 

The US doesn't give aid to Saudi Arabia. It facilitates *sales* of arms to the Saudis.

Jordan is normally the biggest receiver of US aid (prior to Ukraine) for civilians.
Egypt and Israel are the largest receivers of military aid.

Covid PPE/vaccine distributions in Africa actually fueled corruption because much of the
supply was siphoned off to the black market.

Most nations don't want to choose between China/Russia and the US/West.

Lindsay Graham is passionately concerned about plastic polution in the oceans. (Wtf?)

## Student Lecture Notes
Reagan oversaw the "third waev" of democracy.

Third-wave countries soon saw democratic backsliding.

Even though the US is backsliding, it is still among the most democratic nations on Earth.

Treaties we have *not* enacted:
1. Rome Staute
2. International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Civil Rights
3. UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigineous Peoples

The term **blinded by rights** is when we focus too much on the rights of citizens and too
little on basic economic strength that prevents authoritarian rise.

Bush used the term "democratic crusade" in his rhetoric surrounding Iraq.
