# Lecture 13 - Iran
## Guest Lecture
The Iran nuclear deal was signed in 2015. It was *not* a treaty, specifically because
Obama didn't have the necessary support from Congress to enact a treaty. The downside of
this type of deal is that it is more easily removed by future presidents, as Trump did.

"Gambles" on the Iran nuclear deal:
1. Left out everything but nukes. Nothing was mentioned on democracy, human rights, etc.
2. Many parts were vague/confusing
3. Attention shifted away from Iran after signing.
4. Tried to bypass Congress as much as possible. This was the fatal flaw.

Withdrawing from the deal made things far worse. Not only does the US not look flakey on
deals, but Iran started scaling up its nuclear program immediately after the deal ended.

We need to collaborate with China to establish a new order in which Iran should operate.

On sanctions:
1. Iran suffered initially from sanctions.
2. Iran adjusted its economy to deal with sanctions.
3. Sanctions drove Iran *towards* Russia and China

Because other nations in the region fear Iranian nukes, Iran developing nuclear weapons
is going to lead to a "proliferation avalanche." Iran knows this risk, but doesn't care.

The CIA doesn't think Iran has the desire to develop nukes now or in the immediate future.
The concern is future leaders/decisions.

## Professor Lecture
The liberal world order isn't returning.

Bigger military does not equate to more influence anymore, especially since the world has
gotten more peaceful.

Global issues (pandemic response, climate change, etc.) require major power cooperation, 
which we don't see right now.

The US has underperformed within the current rules-based order, *and* that rules-based
order itself has underperformed on the whole (increased intra-state/ethnic violence).

We need rules-based order, but more seats at the table to decide rules.

**Geopolitical pluralism**:
1. Few states want relations with only one major power.
2. National interests are more regional than global.

US primacy in the Pacific would be highly unstable even if it were possible, which it
likely isn't.
