# Lecture 8 - Hostage Diplomacy

## Guest Notes
**Question:** Have countries/rebel groups been detered by the long-term costs of
kidnapping?

**Answer:** That answer is a work-in-progress. The working theory is that there's
a trade-off. In the short term, it is highly beneficial. But kidnapping is illegal
domestically and also a war crime, so there is definitely reputational damage.
We shouldn't be surprised that Venezuela or Iran conducts these kidnappings, but
maybe more suprised that China does so since they are working on building their
legitimacy internationally.

---

**Question:** Was the Griener/Bout prisoner swap "fair," given that one was an
internatinal arms trafficker, and the other is a basketball player?

**Answer:** We need to acknowledge that prisoner swaps will almost never be
"fair" because high-value prisoners are the price that the US is willing to pay to
secure the return of their citizens.

---

**Question:** Is there a difference in reaction in the public when the kidnappers
are state actors vs. non-state actors?

**Answer:** Not that long ago, hostage diplomacy wasn't really a thing, but non-
state kidnapping was very common. The first ISIS beheading was the foreign policy
event that was the biggest impact on the public after 9/11. The media appears to 
be in the process of learning how to deal with hostage diplomacy. There is also
a chance that covering kidnappings in media can make things worse, but that is 
less a concern regarding hostage diplomacy, although those beliefs don't appear to
be backed by empirical data.

---

**Question:** Should we still have a no-concessions policy?

**Answer:** There are many good reasons to have a no-concessions policy. 
Deterrence by denial says that if we aren't going to pay ransom, they will stop
doing it. But that doesn't appear to be the case, especially given that in many
circumstances, we "cheat" the policy and make concessions anyway. Thus, as 
tempting as attractive as they may be, are probably not the way to go.

